>Wood> ruff: THE OUTGOING ACTING
HEAD OF THE I.R. FACS.ED A
BLISTERING ROUND OF QUESTIONS
FROM LAWMAKERS TODAY, OVER HIS
AGENCY'S IMPROPER TARGETING OF
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
HAVE EXTENDED EXCERPTS OF
TODAY'S HEARING: THE PARTISAN
JOUSTING AND THE PUSH TO LEARN
WHAT HAPPENED AND WHO WAS
RESPONSIBLE.
>> Woodruff: THEN, MARGARET
WARNER REPORTS ON THE PENTAGON'S
MOVES TO DEAL WITH THE GROWING
OUTRAGE OVER SEXUAL ASSAULTS IN
THE MILITARY-- A PROBLEM THE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE SAID TODAY
HE WILL DO EVERYTHING NECESSARY
TO FIX.
>> Brown: MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID
BROOKS ANALYZE THE WEEK'S NEWS.
PLUS, A SPECIAL REPORT WITH OUR
OWN MacNEIL AND LEHRER ON
COVERING THE WATERGATE HEARINGS.
>> GOOD EVENING FROM WASHINGTON.
IN A FEW MOMENTS, WE'RE GOING TO
BRING YOU THE ENTIRE PROCEEDINGS
IN THE FIRST DAY OF THE SENATE
TERWAGATE HEARINGS.
>> WE ARE RUNNING IT ALL EACH
DAY BECAUSE WE THINK THESE
HEARINGS ARE IMPORTANT.
WE ARE DOING THIS AS AN
EXPERIMENT TO GIVE YOU THE WHOLE
STORY, HOWEVER MANY HOURS IT MAY
TAKE.
>> Woodruff: 40 YEARS AFTER THE
SCANDAL THAT BROUGHT DOWN AN
AMERICAN PRESIDENT.
ROBERT MacNE ANDIL JIM LEHRER
REFLECT ON WATERGATE'S LEGACY
AND THE GAVEL-TO-GAVEL COVERAGE
THAT GAVE RISE TO THE PROGRAM
YOU'RE WATCHING TONIGHT.
>> PUBLIC TELEVISION WAS DOING
SOMETHING THAT COMMERCIAL
NETWORKS, FOR ALL THEIR
BRILLIANCE IN NEWS, WOULDN'T AND
COULDN'T DO.
>> THAT WAS BEFORE THERE WERE
THINGS LIKE C-SPAN.
GOING GAVEL-TO-GAVEL, THE WAY WE
WERE GOING, IN THE DAYTIME AND
IN PARTICULAR, REPEATING IT AT
NIGHT.
THIS HAD NEVER HAPPENED BEFORE.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: CONGRESS TODAY
FORMALLY LAUNCHED THE FIRST OF
ITS INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE
FUROR SWIRLING AROUND THE
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE.
THE STAR WITNESS WAS THE
OFFICIAL WHO HAD BEEN RUNNING
THE AGENCY, UNTIL WEDNESDAY.
"NEWSHOUR" CORRESPONDENT KWAME
HOLMAN HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: STEVEN MILLER-- THE
MAN FORCED OUT AS ACTING HEAD OF
THE I.R.S.-- BEGAN BY
ACKNOWLEDGING FAILURES.
>> FIRST AND FOREMOST, AS ACTING
COMMISSIONER, I WANT TO
APOLOGIZE ON BEHALF OF THE
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE F THEOR
MISTAKES THAT WE MADE AND THE
POOR SERVICE WE PROVIDED.
THE AFFECTED ORGANIZATIONS AND
THE AMERICAN PUBLIC DESERVE
BETTER.
PARTISANSHIP OR EVEN THE
PERCEPTION OF PARTISANSHIP HAS
NO PLACE AT THE I.R.S.
IT CANNOT EVEN APPEAR TO BE A
CONSIDERATION IN DETERMINING THE
TAX EXEMPTION OF AN
ORGANIZATION.
>> Reporter: BUT AT THE SAME
TIME, MILLER ASSERTED I.R.S.
STAFFERS DID NOT ACT OUT OF
POLITICAL MOTIVATION WHEN THEY
GAVE SPECIAL SCRUTINY TO TEA
PARTY AND OTHER GROUPS ON THE
POLITICAL RIGHT.
>> I THINK THAT WHAT HAPPENED
HERE WAS THAT FOOLISH MISTAKES
WERE MADE BY PEOPLE TRYING TO BE
MORE EFFICIENT IN THEIR WORKLOAD
SELECTION.
THE LISTING DESCRIBED IN THE
REPORT, WHILE INTOLERABLE, WAS A
MISTAKE AND NOT AN ACT OF
PARTISANSHIP.
>> Reporter: MILLER RESIGNED
WEDNESDAY, AT THE BEHEST OF
TREASURY SECRETARY JACK LEW.
JOSEPH GRANT, WHO OVERSEES
REQUESTS FOR TAX-EXEMPT STATUS,
ALSO WILL STEP DOWN.
HE'S RETIRING NEXT MONTH.
BUT IT WAS CLEAR TODAY THAT
NEITHER THE PERSONNEL SHAKEUP
NOR APOLOGIES HAVE CALMED THE
STORM FOR MANY, ESPECIALLY
REPUBLICANS.
MICHIGAN REPUBLICAN DAVE CAMP
CHAIRED THE HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS
HEARING.
>> THE REALITY ISHIS  TIS NOT A
PERSONNEL PROBLEM.
THIS IS A PROBLEM OF THE I.R.S.
BEING TOO LARGE, TOO POWERFUL,
TOO INTRUSIVE AND TOO ABUSIVE OF
HONEST, HARDWORKING TAXPAYERS.
>> Reporter: CAMP, AND OTHER
REPUBLICANS, ALSO ARGUED THAT
WHAT HAPPENED AT THE I.R.S. IS
PART OF A CULTURE OF COVER-UPS
BY THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
>> IT SEEMS LIKE THE TRUTH IS
HIDDEN FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
JUST LONG ENOUGH TO MAKE IT
THROUGH AN ELECTION.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE HAVE A RIGHT
TO THE TRUTH, TO A GOVERNMENT
THAT DELIVERS THE FACTS, GOOD OR
BAD, NO MATTER WHAT.
>> Reporter: THE COMMITTEE'S TOP
DEMOCRAT, SANDER LEVIN OF
MICHIGAN, FIRED BACK THAT SAYING
THAT GOES TOO FAR.
>> I TOTALLY, TOTALLY DISAGREE.
IF THIS HEARING BECOMES
ESSENTIALLY A BOOTSTRAP TO
CONTINUE THE CAMPAIGN OF 2012
AND TO PREPARE FOR 2014, WE WILL
BE MAKING A VERY, VERY SERIOUS
MISTAKE AND, INDEED, NOT MEETING
OUR OBLIGATION OF TRUST TO THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: TODAY'S HEARING IS
JUST THE BEGINNING OF CONGRESS'S
EXAMINATION OF I.R.S. SCRUTINY
OF THE TEA PARTY AND OTHER
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS.
SO FAR THREE CONGRESSIONAL
COMMITTEES HAVE ANNOUNCED PLANS
TO INVESTIGATE.
AND, ON TUESDAY, ATTORNEY
GENERAL ERIC HOLDER ANNOUNCED
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT WAS
LOOKING INTO WHETHER ANY
CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS HAVE TAKEN
PLACE.
SO FAR, THE MAIN SOURCE OF
INFORMATION ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED
IS J. RUSSELL GEORGE, A TREASURY
DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR GENERAL.
HIS REPORT, RELEASED THIS WEEK,
SINGLED OUT THE I.R.S. OFFICE IN
CINCINNATI THAT SCREENS
APPLICATIONS FOR TAX EXEMPTIONS.
>> I.R.S. EMPLOYEES ACTUALLY
BEG SELANECTING TEA PARTY AND
OTHER ORGIZATANIONS FOR REVIEW
IN EARLY 2010.
>> Reporter: GEORGE SAID THE
PRACTICE LASTED ABOUT 18 MONTHS,
AND HE BLAMED INEFFECTIVE
MANAGEMENT.
HE SAID I.R.S. OFFICIALS TOLD
HIM THEY WERE NOT UNDER ANY
POLITICAL PRESSURE TO ACT.
WASHINGTON DEMOCRAT JIM
McDERMOTT PURSUED THAT
CONCLUSION.
>> THE INSPECTOR GENERAL'S
REPORT SAYS THAT NO ONE ACTED
OUT OF MALICE OR POLITICAL
MOTIVATION.
MR. GEORGE, I WANT TO KNOW, DO
YOU STILL STAND BY THAT?
>> WE HAVE NO EVIDENCE AT THIS
TIME TO CONTRADICT THAT
ASSERTION, SIR.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, STEVEN
MILLER ARGUED THAT EVEN THE TERM
"TARGETING" IS UNFAIR.
HE SAID, THE CINCINNATI OFFICE
WAS SIMPLY OVERWHELMED WHEN
APPLICATIONS FROM TEA PARTY
GROUPS EXPLODED.
>> WHAT HAPPENED HERE IS THAT
SOMEONE SAW SOME TEA PARTY CASES
COME THROUGH.
THEY WERE ACKNOWLEDGING THAT
THEY WERE GOING TO BE ENGAGED IN
POLITICS.
THIS WAS THE TIME FRAME IN 2010
WHEN CITIZENS UNITED WAS OUT.
THERE WAS A LOT OF DISCUSSION IN
THE SYSTEM ABOUT THE USE OF
401(C)(4)S.
PEOPLE IN CINCINNATI DECIDED,
I'VE MENTIONED, WE HAVE A
LIMITED NUMBER OF PEOPLE, 140 TO
200, THAT WORK ON THE 70,000
APPLICATIONS THAT COME IN FOR
TAX-EXEMPT STATUS.
>>epor Rter: REPUBLICAN MIKE
KELLY OF PENNSYLVANIA
COMPLAINED THE I.R.S. WOULD
NEVER ACCEPT THAT KIND OF
EXPLANATION FROM ANY BUSINESS.
>> YOU'RE NOT ALLOWED TO BE
SHODDY, YOU'RE NOT ALLOWED TO BE
RUN HORRIBLY, YOU'RE NOT ALLOWED
TO MAKE MISTAKES, YOU'RE NOT
ALLOWED TO DO ONE DAMN THING
THAT DOESN'T COME IN COMPLIANCE.
IF YOU DO, YOU'RE HELD
RESPONSIBLE RIGHT THEN.
I JUST THINK THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
HAVE SEEN WHAT'S GOING ON RIGHT
NOW IN THEIR GOVERNMENT.
THIS IS ABSOLUTELY AN OVERREACH,
AND THIS IS AN OUTRAGE FOR ALL
AMERICA.
>> Reporter: REPUBLICANS ALSO
DEMANDED TO KNOW WHY MILLER AND
OTHERS AT THE I.R.S. NEVER
INFORMED CONGRESS AFTER THEY
LEARNED WHAT WAS GOING ON IN MAY
OF 2012.
LOUISIANA CONGRESSMAN CHARLES
BOUSTANY:
>> YOU SENT LETTERS TO CONGRESS
ACKNOWLEDGING OUR INVESTIGATION
OF THESE ALLEGATIONS, BUT
CONSISTENTLY OMITTED THAT SUCH
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES THAT
ARE ALLEGED WERE ACTUALLY, IN
FACT, TAKING PLACE.
WHY DID YOU MISLEAD CONGRESS AND
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ON THIS?
>> MR. CHAIRMAN, I DID NOT
MISLEAD CONGRESS NOR THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
I ANSWERED THE QUESTIONS AS THEY
WERE ASKED.
>> Reporter: AND CALIFORNIA
CONGRESSMAN DEVIN NUNES WANTED
TO KNOW WHY MILLER DID NOT FIGHT
TO KEEP HIS JOB, IF HE FEELS
THAT WAY.
>> YOU'VE SAID THAT NUMEROUS
TIMES ON THE RECORD TODAY THAT
YOU DID NOTHING WRONG.
SO I FIND IT HARD TO BELIEVE,
WHY DID YOU RESIGN?
OR WHY ARE YOU RESIGNING?
>> I NEVER SAID I DIDN'T DO
ANYTHING WRONG, MR. NUNES.
WHAT I SAID IS CONTAINED IN THE
QUESTIONS.
I RESIGNED BECAUSE AS THE ACTING
COMMISSIONER, WHAT HAPPENS IN
THE I.R.S., WHETHER I WAS
PERSONALLY INVOLVED OR NOT,
STOPS AT MY DESK.
AND SO I SHOULD BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE FOR WHAT HAPPENS.
WHETHER I WAS PERSONALLY
INVOLVED OR NOT ARE VERY
DIFFERENT QUESTIONS, SIR.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRATS AT THE
HEARING REJECTED CLAIMS OF WIDER
CORRUPTION IN THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION, BUT THEY AGREED
THAT POLITICAL NEUTRALITY AT THE
I.R.S. MUST BE BEYOND QUESTION.
>> WE'RE ALL OUTRAGED.
WE'RE ALL UPSET ABOUT THIS.
I DON'T BELIEVE, NOR DO ANY OF
MY COLLEAGUES BELIEVE, THAT ANY
ORGANIZATION-- POLITICAL
ORGANIZATION SHOULD BE TARGETED
SOLELY BECAUSE OF THEIR THOUGHT.
THAT'S ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
SPECTRUM.
>> LET ME TEE OFF OF SOMETHING,
MR. MILLER, YOU SAID.
YOU SAID, "FOOLISH MISTAKES WERE
MADE."
I THINK THE PRESIDENT ACTUALLY
SAID IT BETTER.
HE SAID THAT THE HANDLING OF
THOSE TAX-EXEMPT APPLICATIONS IN
THAT PROCESS AT THE I.R.S. WAS
OUTRAGEOUS AND INTOLERABLE.
NO EXCUSE.
>> Reporter: AND AS THE FOUR
HOUR HEARING DREW TO A CLOSE,
THERE CAME A PLEDGE FROM THE
CHAIRMAN.
>> I PROMISE THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE, THIS INVESTIGATION HAS
JUST BEGUN.
>> Reporter: THE SENATE FINANCE
COMMITTEE FORMALLY BEGINS ITS
INVESTIGATION WITH A HEARING
NEXT TUESDAY.
>> Brown: STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR": OUTRAGE OVER SEXUAL
ASSAULTS IN THE MILITARY;
SHIELDS AND BROOKS ON THE WEEK'S
NEWS AND MacNEIL AND LEHRER ON
COVERING WATERGATE.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: WALL STREET
FINISHED THIS FRIDAY WITH ITS
FOURTH STRAIGHT WEEK OF GAINS,
AFTER NEW SIGNS OF HOPE ABOUT
THE ECONOMY.
ONE WAS A REPORT THAT FOUND
CONSUMER CONFIDENCE IS HIGHER
THAN EXPECTED.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
ADDED 121 POINTS TODAY TO CLOSE
AT 15,354.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 33
POINTS TO CLOSE AT NEARLY 3,499.
FOR THE WEEK, BOTH THE DOW AND
THE NASDAQ GAINED MORE THAN 1.5%
THIS WAS THE DEADLIEST DAY IN
IRAQ IN MORE THAN EIGHT MONTHS.
AT LEAST 76 PEOPLE DIED IN A
SERIES OF EXPLOSIONS THAT STRUCK
SUNNI MUSLIM AREAS,
STOKING FEARS THAT SECTARIANVIOF
CONTROL.
THE WORST WAS IN BAQOUBA--
NORTHEAST OF BAGHDAD.
AMBULANCES SPED THROUGH BLOOD-
STAINED STREETS AFTER TWIN
EXPLOSIONS
RIPPED THROUGH A CROWD OF SUNNI
WORSHIPPERS, KILLING MORE THAN
40.
TODAY'S ATTACKS FOLLOWED
VIOLENCE THAT KILLED MORE THAN
50 SHI-ITES EARLIER THIS WEEK.
TWO SUNNI MOSQUES WERE TARGETED
IN PAKISTAN TODAY AS WORSHIPERS
GATHERED FOR FRIDAY PRAYERS.
TWIN BOMBINGS IN A VILLAGE IN
THE NORTHWEST KILLED AT LEAST 15
PEOPLE AND WOUNDED MORE THAN 70
OTHERS.
THERE WAS NO IMMEDIATE CLAIM OF
RESPONSIBILITY.
IT WAS WIDELY REPORTED TODAY
THAT RUSSIA HAS SENT THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT ADVANCED ANTI-SHIP
MISSILES.
THEY'RE SAID TO BE OUTFITTED
WITH ADVANCED RADAR TO MAKE THEM
MORE EFFECTIVE.
THE SALE CAME DESPITE U.S. PLEAS
TO MOSCOW TO STOP GIVING
MILITARY AID TO SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
BUT IN RUSSIA TODAY, FOREIGN
MINISTER SERGEI LAVROV SAID HIS
COUNTRY IS MERELY FULFILLING
CONTRACTS.
>> (translated): I DON'T
UNDERSTAND WHY THE MEDIA ARE
TRYING TO MAKE THIS LOOK LIKE A
SENSATION.
WE HAVE NEVER HIDDEN THE FACT
THAT WE ARE SUPPLYING SYRIA WITH
ARMS, IN LINE WITH EARLIER
SIGNED CONTRACTS WHICH DO NOT
BREACH ANY INTERNATIONAL
TREATIES OR RUSSIAN LAWS, WHICH
ARE SOME OF THE STRICTEST IN THE
WORLD IN TERMS OF EXPORT
CONTROLS.
>> Sreenivasan: U.S. SECRETARY
OF STATE JOHN KERRY HAD RAISED
THE ISSUE OF ARMS TRANSFERS TO
SYRIA DURING HIS VISIT IN MOSCOW
EARLIER THIS MONTH.
AT THE STATE DEPARTMENT TODAY,
SPOKESWOMAN JEN PSAKI SAID WHAT
HE SAID THEN, HOLDS TRUE TODAY.
>> THE SECRETARY HIMSELF SAID
THIS JUST TWO WEEKS AGO.
WE REMAIN CONCERNED ABOUT ANY
AID THAT IS BEING PROVIDED TO
HELP THE SYRIAN REGIME BY THE
RUSSIANS OR ANYONE ELSE.
INCLUDING ANY FORM OF MISSILES.
THAT'S A CONCERN WE'VE EXPRESSED
PUBLICLY AND THE SECRETARY AND
OTHERS HAVE EXPRESSED PRIVATELY
AS WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: IN ANOTHER
DEVELOPMENT, HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
RESEARCHERS HAVE FOUND PHYSICAL
EVIDENCE OF TORTURE IN SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT PRISONS.
THE GROUP SAID ONE DEVICE
STRETCHED OR BENT VICTIMS' ARMS
AND LEGS.
IT WAS FOUND IN RAQQA, IN
EASTERN SYRIA, A CITY NOW UNDER
REBEL CONTROL.
THE RESEARCHERS ALSO FOUND
DOCUMENTS SHOWING PEOPLE WERE
DETAINED FOR DEMONSTRATING OR
HELPING INJURED PEOPLE.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: THE ISSUE OF SEXUAL
ASSAULT IN THE MILITARY WAS BACK
IN THE SPOTLIGHT TODAY AT THE
PENTAGON.
MARGARET WARNER REPORTS.
>> Warner: DEFENSE SECRETARY
CHUCK HAGEL AND JOINT CHIEFS
CHAIRMAN MARTIN DEMPSEY OFFERED
NO NEW SOLUTIONS TO THE
MILITARY'S SEXUAL ASSAULT CRISIS
AT TODAY'S MUCH ANTICIPATED
PENTAGON BRIEFING.
HAGEL DID VOW ONCE AGAIN TO DO
EVERYTHING NECESSARY TO ADDRESS
THE PROBLEM.
>> WE'VE IN MANY WAYS FAILED.
THE PROBLEM WILL BE SOLVED HERE
IN THIS INSTITUTION AND WE WILL
FIX IT AND WE WILL DO EVERYTHING
WE NEED TO DO TO FIX IT.
THERE'S NOT A MILITARY LEADER
WHO WAS IN THAT ROOM WHO'S NOT
COMPLETELY COMMITTED TO THAT.
>> Warner: THE PRESS CONFERENCE
COMES ON THE HEELS OF A RECENT
PENTAGON SURVEY ESTIMATING THAT
26,000 MILITARY MEMBERS WERE
SEXUALLY ASSAULTED LAST YEAR-- A
SIGNIFICANT JUMP FROM 2011.
YET ONLY 3,400 OF THOSE ASSAULTS
WERE ACTUALLY REPORTED BY THE
VICTIMS.
>> THERE IS NO SILVER BULLET TO
SOLVING THIS PROBLEM.
>> Warner: PRESIDENT OBAMA HAD
SOME STERN WORDS YESTERDAY AFTER
SUMMONING HAGEL, DEMPSEY AND
OTHER SENIOR MILITARY LEADERS TO
THE WHITE HOUSE.
>> THEY CARE ABOUT THIS.
AND THEY'RE ANGRY ABOUT IT, AND
I HEARD DIRECTLY FROM ALL OF
THEM THAT THEY'RE ASHAMED BY
SOME OF WHAT'S HAPPENED.
>> Warner: UNDERSCORING THAT
SOME IN CONGRESS SAY THE
SOLUTION LIES PARTLY OUTSIDE
THEIR RANKS.
A BI-PARTISAN GROUP OF SENATORS
LED BY NEW YORK DEMOCRAT KIRSTEN
GILLIBRAND INTRODUCED
LEGISLATION THIS WEEK REMOVING
COMMANDERS FROM DECIDING WHETHER
TO PROSECUTE ANY SERIOUS CRIME,
INCLUDING SEXUAL ASSAULT.
>> TODAY WE'RE STANDING ON A
UNITED FRONT TO TAKE ON THESE
THIS ISSUES ON WITH NEW
LEGISLATION THAT WILL
FUNDAMENTALLY REMOVE THE
DECISION MAKING FROM THE CHAIN
OF COMMAND AND GIVES THAT
DISCRETIONS TO AN EXPERIENCED
MILITARY PROSECUTOR WHERE IT
BELONGS.
TOO OFTEN, THESE BRAVE MEN AND
>> Warner: IN TWO RECENT, HIGH-
PROFILE CASES, AIR FORCE
GENERALS THREW OUT CONVICTIONS
OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT.
TODAY JOINT CHIEFS CHAIRMAN
DEMPSEY SAID THAT A DECADE OF
WAR MAY HAVE UNDERMINED
ACCOUNTABILITY ON SEXUAL
ASSAULT.
>> YOU MIGHT ARGUE THAT WE'VE
BECOME A LITTLE TOO FORGIVING
BECAUSE YOU KNOW IF A
PERPETRATOR SHOWS UP AT A COURT
MARSHAL WITH A RACK OF RIBBONS
AND HAS FOUR DEPLOYMENTS AND A
PURPLE HEART.
THERE IS CERTAINLY A RISK THAT
WE MIGHT BE A LITTLE TOO
FORGIVING OF THAT PARTICULAR
CRIME.
>> Warner: BUT HE APPEARED TO
PUSH BACK AGAINST THE GILLEBRAND
PROPOSAL, SAYING:
>> IN OUR SYSTEM WE GIVE A
COMMANDER LIFE AND DEATH
DECISIONS MAKING AUTHORITY.
I CAN'T IMAGINE GOING FORWARD
SOLVING THIS ISSUES WITH OUT
THE COMMANDERS INVOLVED.
>> Warner: HAGEL SUGGESTED MORE
OPENNESS ON THE QUESTION.
>> WE'RE LOOKING AT EVERYTHING,
AND YES, WE'RE LISTENING TO
VICTIMS CAREFULLY.
>> Warner: OTHER PROPOSED BILLS
IN THE SENATE WOULD IMPROVE
RECORD KEEPING OF SEXUAL
MISCONDUCT COMPLAINTS AND CREATE
NEW STANDARDS FOR FILLING SEXUAL
ASSAULT PREVENTION POSITIONS IN
THE MILITARY.
THAT SECOND POINT HAS COME INTO
SHARP RELIEF LATELY, WITH THE
REMOVAL OF TWO OF THOSE
OFFICIALS.
THE FIRST-- LIEUTENANT COLONEL
JEFFREY KRUSINSKI-- HEADED THE
AIR FORCE SEXUAL ASSAULT
PREVENTION PROGRAM UNTIL HE WAS
ARRESTED ON CHARGES OF SEXUAL
BATTERY.
AND THIS WEEK, IT WAS DISCLOSED
THAT AN ARMY SERGEANT WHO
HANDLED SEXUAL ASSAULT CASES AT
FORT HOOD, TEXAS IS BEING
CRIMINALLY INVESTIGATED ON SEX
CRIME ALLEGATIONS.
SECRETARY HAGEL TODAY RELEASED
>> Warner: FOR MORE ON THIS
STORY, I'M JOINED BY "WALL
STREET JOURNAL" PENTAGON
REPORTER JULIAN BARNES.
JULIAN, WELCOME.
YOU WERE AT THAT PRESS
CONFERENCE TODAY.
PARSE THIS FOR US.
HOW DID YOU READ THEIR RESPONSE
TO THIS GROWING PRESSURE ON THE
HILL?
>> WELL, THEY ARE CLEARLY OPEN
TO SOME OF THESE REFORMS.
YOU SAW JUST A FEW WEEKS AGO
THEY WERE PUSHING BACK MUCH MORE
FIRMLY ON SENAT SENATE SENATOR
GILLIBRAND'S PROPOSAL SAYING
THAT MILITARY COMMANDERS NEEDED
TO RETAIN THIS AUTHORITY.
SECRETARY HAGEL SAID TODAY THAT
OPEN TO OPTIONS WHERE THEY'RE
REVIEWING THE PROPOSALS.
WE ALSO HEARD FROM THE AIR FORCE
CHIEF OF STAFF TODAY WHO SAID HE
PERSONALLY SUPPORTED IT AND
MILITARY.
THEY SEE THE WRITING ON THE
WALL.
>> Warner: ESPECIALLY COMING
FROM THE AIR FORCE.
BUT DID YOU DETECT ANY
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN JOINT CHIEFS
CHAIRMAN DEMPSEY AND SECRETARY
HAGEL ON THIS QUESTION?
>> WELL, YOUR PIECE POINTED OUT
JUST SO AND THERE IS A LITTLE
DIFFERENCE THERE.
THE MILITARY HAS WANTED TO
PRESERVE THEIR JUSTICE SYSTEM AS
IT IS, WHICH GIVES IT AN
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF POWER TO
COMMANDERS.
THEY CAN DECIDE WHETHER CASES GO
FORWARD.
THEY CAN VACATE SENTENCES AND
CONVICTIONS AFTERWARDS.
NOW THERE'S BEEN A SERIES OF
HIGH-PROFILE CASES WHERE THOSE
CONVICTIONS HAVE BEEN VACATED
AND THERE'S BEEN A HUGE BACKLASH
FROM CONGRESS.
THERE'S NO WAY THE SYSTEM IS
GOING TO STAY THE WAY IT IS.
>> Warner: DO YOU THINK,
THOUGH, THAT SECRETARY HAGEL AND
THE PRESIDENT COULD BE CAUGHT
BETWEEN THE MILITARY BRASS AND
SORT OF THE DEMANDS FROM THE
PUBLIC AND THE HILL?
>> UM, THERE'S A POSSIBILITY OF
THAT BUT WE HAVE SEEN OVER THE
LAST FEW WEEKS AS THIS SCANDAL
HAS CONTINUED THAT THE MILITARY
IS SLOWLY SHIFTING THERE WAS TWO
MONTHS AGO RESIS TONES ANY
CHANGE IN THE MILITARY JUSTICE
SYSTEM.
WEEK BY WEEK THEY ARE COMING ON
BOARD TO THE CONGRESSIONAL.
>> Warner: NOW TELL US WHAT'S
BEHIND -- NOT WHAT'S BEHIND.
BUT SECRETARY HAGEL DID TODAY
ISSUE THE WRITTEN DIRECTIVE FOR
WHAT HE SAID TWO DAYS AGO WHICH
IS WE'RE GOING TO RESCREEN ALL
THESE SEXUAL ASSAULT PREVENTION
-- NOT JUST OFFICERS BUT
EVERYBODY INVOLVED AND ALL THE
RECRUITERS.
HOW RIGOROUS -- FIRST OF ALL,
WHAT ARE THEY LOOKING FOR THERE
AND HOW RIGOROUS IS IT GOING TO
BE?
>> WELL, I THINK NOW IT'S GOING
TO BE QUITE RIGOROUS.
I MEAN, I THINK IF YOU LOOK BACK
IN THE PAST THIS WAS NOT AN
ISSUE THAT THE MILITARY PUT THE
HIGHEST PRIORITY ON.
THINGS HAVE CHANGED NOW.
THE MILITARY IS MAKING THIS
THEIR TOP PRIORITY.
YOU HEARD GENERAL ODIERNO TALK
ABOUT IT.
YOU HEARD SECRETARY HAGEL TALK
ABOUT IT AND, MOST IMPORTANTLY,
THE PRESIDENT.
SO WHERE YOU MIGHT HAVE HAD
MAYBE NOT YOUR TOP-NOTCH PEOPLE
IN THESE JOBS, I THINK MORE AND
MORE WE'RE GOING TO SEE THE BEST
AND BRIGHTEST GET ASSIGNED THESE
DUTIES.
>> Warner: WHICH HASN'T BEEN
THE CASE UP TILL NOW, YOU MEAN.
IF YOU HAD A SUPERSTAR OR A
BUDDING SUPERSTAR YOU WEREN'T
GOING TO MAKE HIM OR HER THE
SEXUAL ABUSE PREVENTION OFFICER.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND NOW THEY'RE GOING TO TAKE
THE TOP NONCOMMISSIONED OFFICERS
AND SAY, HEY, IN ADDITION TO
THIS DUTY YOU'LL DO THIS BECAUSE
IT'S THE ARMY'S TOP PRIORITY.
>> Warner: NOW, THAT PROPOSAL
OF GILLIBRAND'S, SOME OF THE
OTHERS ON THE HILL, WHAT THEY'RE
TALKING ABOUT TODAY ALL DEAL
WITH WHAT TO DO AFTER SOME
ASSAULT HAS OCCURRED.
BUT IS THERE CONCERN IN THE
PENTAGON THAT THERE'S A DEEPER
PROBLEM WITH THE BASIC MILITARY
CLIMATE AND CULTURE?
WHAT ARE YOU HEARING ABOUT THAT?
>> VERY MUCH SO.
AND THE MILITARY OFFICERS ARE
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT.
THAT THERE IS A CULTURAL SHIFT
THAT NEEDS TO BE MADE AND YOU'VE
HEARD THEM TALK ABOUT THIS.
BUT THIS IS A DIFFICULT THING TO
CHANGE.
IT'S A DIFFICULT THING TO FERRET
OUT.
WHERE IS THERE A LOCKER ROOM
MENTALITY AND ATTITUDE THAT MAY
SORT OF SIGNAL TO SOME PEOPLE
THAT IT'S OKAY TO DO SOME OF
THIS STUFF WHICH, IN FACT, IS A
CRIME.
AND, YOU KNOW, IT'S WAR-FIGHTING
CULTURE AND SOMETIMES THAT
CROSSES THE LINE IN OTHER WAYS
AND SO CHANGING IT IS DIFFICULT.
YOU WANT TO KEEP PEOPLE'S --
HONE THEIR EDGES AS -- IN COMBAT
BUT STILL MAKE SURE THAT THEY
ARE, YOU KNOW, FOLLOWING THE
LAW, BEING RESPECTFUL, AND NOT,
YOU KNOW, OBJECTIFYING ANY GROUP
OF PEOPLE.
>> Warner: INCLUDING WOMEN.
YOU HEARD -- IT WAS JOINT CHIEFS
CHAIRMAN DEMPSEY RESPONDED TO
THE QUESTION ABOUT BOTH ALCOHOL
AS A FACTOR AND A SORT OF DECADE
OF WAR.
WHAT DO THE -- WHAT'S HE REALLY
TALKING ABOUT THERE AND WHAT
WHAT DO THE REPORTED CASES AT
LEAST SAY ABOUT THE INVOLVEMENT
OF THOSE TWO FACTORS?
>> WELL, THEY'RE -- THEY'RE
IMPORTANT IN TWO WAYS HERE.
WE -- YOU KNOW, THERE ARE NO
EASY ANSWERS IN SEXUAL ASSAULT,
WHAT CAUSES IT, WHY WE'VE SEEN A
SPIKE.
IT'S VERY SIMILAR TO THE
MILITARY'S SUICIDE ISSUE IN THAT
RESPECT.
THESE ARE COMPLEX ISSUES, THEY
HAVE ROOTS BOTH IN THE MILITARY
AND IN THE WIDER CULTURE.
A DECADE OF WAR HAS LED TO
SOLDIERS, MARINES, AIRMEN,
SAILORS, COMING BACK STRAINED.
AND SOME N SOME CASES ISOLATED.
SOME OF THOSE THINGS CAN LEAD TO
THE ABUSE OF DRUGS OR ALCOHOL.
THAT HAS BEEN SHOWN TO MAKE
INCIDENTS OF SEXUAL ABUSE,
ASSAULT, MORE PREVALENT.
SO THAT'S ISSUE ONE.
DOES IT INCREASE THE INCIDENT?
THEN THERE'S ALSO THE ISSUE OF
WHEN THESE GET PROSECUTED.
DOES A COMMANDER SAY "HEY, LOOK,
THIS GUY'S BEEN THROUGH A LOT,
THIS GUY HAS BEEN BLOWN UP IN
IRAQ, BLOWN UP IN AFGHANISTAN,
WE'RE GOING TO CUT HIM SOME
SLACK"?
CERTAINLY HAPPENS ON NONSEXUAL
ASSAULT CASES.
A SHOPLIFTING, A BAR FIGHT.
>> Warner: REALLY?
>> BUT NOW THEY'RE SAYING WE'RE
NOT GOING TO LET THIS HAPPEN
WHEN IT COMES TO SEXUAL ASSAULT.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A ZERO
TOLERANCE POLICY.
>> Warner: JULIAN BARNES,
"WALL STREET JOURNAL," THANK
YO
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AND TO THE ANALYSIS
OF SHIELDS AND BROOKS,
SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
SO, GENTLEMEN, IT'S ONLY BEEN
ONE WEEK BUT THREE GIANT
HEADACHES FOR THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION, FOR THE
PRESIDENT.
DAVID DAVID, LET'S TAKE THEM ONE
BY ONE.
THE I.R.S., THIS HEARING TODAY.
TWO COMPLETELY DIFFERENT POINTS
OF VIEW ON WHAT HAPPENED.
WHOM ARE WE TO BELIEVE?
>> WELL, I THINK WE JUST DON'T
KNOW.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE DON'T KNOW
IS WHO  +*EUPBS DATED THIS.
WAS THERE LOBBYING FROM CAPITOL
HILL ON INSTIGATING THIS?
SECOND, WHO KNEW IT WHEN?
THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT DID THEY
KNOW IT?
DID ANYBODY IN THE WHITE HOUSE
HOW UP IN THE I.R.S. DID THEY
KNOW IT?
DID THEY GIVE MAYBE NOT
COMPLETELY FALSE TESTIMONY BUT
NON-FORTHCOMING TESTIMONY.
AND THEN THE FINAL THING-- WHICH
WE MAY KNOW A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT AFTER TODAY AND AFTER THE
REPORT-- IS WHAT IT POLITICAL
THUGGERY OR OBLIVIOUSNESS.
I THINK THE EVIDENCE ON THE
LATTER ISSUE IS PROBABLY IT WAS
A LITTLE MORE TOWARD OBLIVIOUS.
YOU HAD A GROUP OF TECHNOCRATS
WHO HAD BECOME SO ABSTRACTED AND
REMOVED FROM POLITICAL REALITY
IT WASN'T BLINDINGLY OBVIOUS TO
THEM THAT IF YOU TARGET TEA
PARTY GROUPS THAT WILL LOOK LIKE
POLITICAL THUGGERY.
IT LOOKS LIKE THAT WAS MORE THE
EXPLANATION.
>> Woodruff: MARK, MORE LIKE
OBLIVIOUSNESS THAN POLITICAL
TARGETING?
>> AS OF NOW I WOULD SAY, THAT
JUDY.
IT -- IF THE WORDS INSTEAD OF
TEA PARTY AND "9/12" WERE, IN
FACT, "CHOICE" "REPRODUCTIVE
FREEDOM" "PEACE" "FEMINIST" AND
THEY WERE SCRUTINIZING THOSE I
THINK YOU'D HEAR A CRY, AN
UNDERSTANDABLE OUTCRY FROM THOSE
ON THE LEFT-HAND SIDE OF THE
POLITICAL EQUATION.
AND THIS PLAYS RIGHT IN TO THIS
WHOLE STORY PLAYS RIGHT INTO THE
REPUBLICAN WHEEL HOUSE THAT WHAT
THE CONSERVATIVES HAVE LONG
ARGUED-- THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS
TOO BIG, THE GOVERNMENT IS TOO
INTRUSIVE, THE GOVERNMENT CANNOT
BE TRUSTED, THE GOVERNMENT CAN
BE EVIL.
AND I THINK THAT RESPECTS THE
GREATEST THREAT TO THIS
ADMINISTRATION RIGHT NOW AND I
THINK THAT'S WHAT THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS FAILED TO GET
ON TOP OF SO FAR.
>> Warner: WHAT DO YOU MEAN
FAILED TO GET ON TOP OF?
>> I JUST COMPARE THE
PRESIDENT'S PASSIVE APPROACH.
HE WAS DETACHED AT THE OUTSET.
HE DID GROW MORE ACTIVE AND
INVOLVED AS THE WEEK WENT ON.
HE LEARNED ABOUT THIS IN THE
NEWS REPORTS LAST FRIDAY EVEN
THOUGH WE FOUND OUT --
>> Warner: FROM THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL.
>> THE INSPECTOR GENERAL THAT
TWO WEEKS EARLIER THAT THE WHITE
HOUSE COUNSEL HAD HAD AT LEAST
AN OUTLINE OF A REPORT ON THE
VERY THING.
WHAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR, QUITE
HONESTLY, IS A PRESIDENT WHO
STEPS UP AND SAYS "THIS IS ON MY
WATCH.
THIS IS MY RESPONSIBILITY."
NOT UNLIKE WHAT PRESIDENT
KENNEDY DID AT THE TIME OF THE
BAY OF PIGS WHEN HE SAID SIMPLY
THAT DEFEAT IS AN ORPHAN AND
VICTORY HAS A HUNDRED FATHERS.
IT WAS GOOD POLITICS AND IT'S
GOOD POLICY TO TAKE THAT KIND OF
LEADERSHIP AND THAT
RESPONSIBILITY.
I THINK HE SHOULD HAVE APPOINTED
A INDEPENDENT COUNSEL AND I
THINK -- BECAUSE, JUDY,
CONFIDENCE IS N GOVERNMENT IS
ERODED.
IT HURTS NOT SIMPLY GOVERNMENT.
IT HURTS NOT ONLY THE COUNTRY.
IT HURTS THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY
WHICH BELIEVES THAT GOVERNMENT
IS AN INSTRUMENT OF SOCIAL
JUSTICE AND ECONOMIC PROGRESS.
>> Woodruff: SO, DAVID, HOW
MUCH IS IT THE PRESIDENT'S
RESPONSIBILITY?
BECAUSE PEOPLE KEEP LOOKING FOR
DIRECT CONNECTION WITH THE WHITE
HOUSE AND THERE'S A QUESTION SO
FAR ABOUT WHERE THAT IS OR WHAT
THAT IS.
>> RIGHT, WELL, I THINK MARK
MAKES THE RIGHT DISTINCTION.
THIS IS NOT SO FAR ABOUT THE
WHITE HOUSE, IT'S NOT ABOUT THE
POLITICAL FORTUNES OF PRESIDENT
OBAMA.
IT'S NOT EVEN ABOUT THE
POLITICAL FORTUNES OF ATTORNEY
GENERAL ERIC HOLDER, THESE THREE
SCANDALS.
IT IS ABOUT GOVERNMENT AND TRUST
AND TRUST IN GOVERNMENT AND I
THINK IT'S MORE A MANAGEMENT
ISSUE.
A MANAGEMENT VALUES ISSUE.
PRESIDENT OBAMA CAN'T CONTROL
THE MILLIONS OF PEOPLE WHO WORK
FOR THE GOVERNMENT BUT LEADERS
OF AGENCIES CAN SAY, LISTEN,
WE'RE IN GOVERNMENT TO DO GOOD
BUT WE HAVE TO UNDERSTAND THAT
POWER CORRUPTS AND THOSE OF US
WHO GO INTO GOVERNMENT TEND TO
LIKE TO CONTROL OTHER PEOPLE.
WE TEND TO LIKE TO RUN OTHER
PEOPLE'S LIVES.
AND WE HAVE TO BE EXTREMELY
RESTRAINED ABOUT HOW WE USE OUR
POWER.
WE HAVE TO BE EXTREMELY
SENSITIVE THAT WE'RE GOING TO
NOT BE DISINTERESTED IN THE USE
OF THAT POWER.
SO THERE HAS TO BE A CULTURE OF
SELF-RESTRAINT AND I DON'T THINK
THERE WAS A CULTURE OF
SELF-RESTRAINT AT THE I.R.S.
I CERTAINLY DON'T THINK THERE
WAS A CULTURE OF SELF-RESTRAINT
AT THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
WHERE THEY WENT HOG WILD WITH
THIS INVESTIGATION INTO THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS.
SO I THINK IT'S MORE, AS MARK
SAYS, ABOUT HOW GOVERNMENT
OPERATES.
AND IF GOVERNMENT'S GOING TO ACT
IN AN UNRESTRAINED FASHION THAT
DOESN'T DISCIPLINE ITSELF PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO TURN OFF FROM IT.
THAT'S THE CORE THREAT HERE.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU'RE SAYING
-- IT SOUNDS LIKE THAT TWO OF
YOU ARE SAYING, MARK, YOU CAN'T
REALLY SEPARATE THESE THREE
PROBLEMS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION.
THEY'VE ALL KIND OF COME
TOGETHER TO REPRESENT ONE
SYMBOLIC FAILURE.
>> NO, I THINK THEY'RE EASILY --
I THINK BENGHAZI IS ESSENTIALLY
OVER.
I MEAN, I THINK BENGHAZI WAS
TRUMPED UP, THERE ARE THOSE WHO
WANT THIS TO BE SOME GREAT
CONSPIRACY.
I THINK THAT HAS BEEN BASICALLY
-- I'D BE SURPRISED IF BENGHAZI
IS STILL BEING DISCUSSED OTHER
THAN BY DARRELL ISSA'S COMMITTEE
IN THE HOUSE.
>> Woodruff: BECAUSE THE WHITE
HOUSE ISSUED THE HUNDREDS OF
E-MAILS.
>> AND THERE'S NO THERE THERE.
THERE REALLY ISN'T.
I THINK DAVID'S ABSOLUTELY RIGHT
ABOUT THE ASSOCIATED PRESS AND
THE OVERREACH OF THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT, THE FAILURE TO
CONSULT, THE FAILURE TO HAVE A
CONVERSATION, THE FAILURE TO
EVEN APPROACH.
20 PHONES, HOME PHONES, CELL
PHONES, CHILLING EFFECT ON
ANYBODY WHO WANTS TO BE A
WHISTLE-BLOWER, WHO'S GOT
INFORMATION OF WRONGDOING IS
GOING TO THINK TWICE, THREE
TIMES WHETHER, IN FACT, THEY'RE
GOING TO BE VISITED BY SOMEBODY
FROM THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT AND
THE F.B.I.
BUT I THINK THE I.R.S. GOES TO
THE VERY TRUST.
IT'S THE HEALTH CARE ACT, THAT'S
-- IT'S A CENTRAL AGENCY IN
COLLECTING ALL THE INFORMATION
ON THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT WHEN
IT COMES INTO FORCE AND IF
THERE'S NO CONFIDENCE THERE IN
ITS INTEGRITY AND CONFIDENCE,
THAT'S A ALE PROBLEM FOR THIS
COUNTRY LET ALONE FOR THE
ADMINISTRATION.
>> Woodruff: SO, DAVID, YOU
AGREE THIS SPILLS OVER INTO JUST
ABOUT EVERYTHING ELSE, INCLUDING
HEALTH CARE AND EVERYTHING ELSE
THE GOVERNMENT DOES?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
YOU KNOW, IF YOU GO THROUGH THE
20th CENTURY AND IF YOU ASK
PEOPLE "DO YOU TRUST GOVERNMENT
TO DO THE RIGHT THING MOST OF
THE TIME?"
TYPICALLY THE NUMBERS ARE ABOUT
70%.
IN THE LAST TEN YEARS MAYBE IT'S
19%, 25%, SOMEWHERE DOWN THERE.
THAT FUNDAMENTAL SHIFT IN THE
COUNTRY, DISTRUST OF GOVERNMENT,
CHANGES POLITICS IN ALL SORTS OF
WAYS.
TO ME IT EXPLAINS WHY THE HEALTH
CARE LAW REMAINSEN POPULAR,
BECAUSE PEOPLE DON'T TRUST
GOVERNMENT TO DO SOMETHING
COMPLICATED FOR THEM.
AND THIS IS A CYNICAL COUNTRY
ABOUT GOVERNMENT RIGHT NOW AND
THIS PLAYS INTO THAT AND
UNDERLINES THAT AND WILL
REINFORCE THAT.
BEEN FAIR, THE TEA PARTY PEOPLE
TARGETING US" AND NOBODY'S
BELIEVED THEM BUT IT TURNS OUT
FOR WHATEVER MOTIVATION THEY
WERE MORE OR LESS RIGHT.
IF I COULD MAKE ONE POINT ABOUT
BENGHAZI WHERE I AGREE WITH MARK
ABOUT THE TALKING POINTS OF
BENGHAZI.
THAT'S A NON-SCANDAL.
BASICALLY IT WAS A TURF WAR
BETWEEN THE C.I.A. AND THE STATE
DEPARTMENT AND THE SEE JAY BEGAN
TO WALK BACK SOME OF THEIR
ALLEGATIONS.
I STILL THERE'S A BENGHAZI ISSUE
ON WHY WE DIDN'T SEND SUPPORT
TROOPS WHEN AMBASSADOR STEVENS
AND OTHERS WERE IN TROUBLE.
THAT ISSUE WHEN NO ACTION WAS
TAKEN THAT COULD HAVE AVERTED
SOME CATASTROPHE.
I THINK THAT PART REMAINS AN
ISSUE.
>> I THINK THAT'S A LEGITIMATE
AREA OF INQUIRY.
BUT I THINK THE REAL PROBLEM,
JUDY, THAT FACES -- JUDY, THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT -- IF YOU'RE
GOING TO MAKE A CASE FOR IT, IT
ABOLISHED SLAVERY, IT ENDED
SEGREGATION, IT BUILT THE LAND
GRANT COLLEGES THAT HAVE
PRODUCED MORE NOBEL PRIZE
WINNERS THAN ALL THE
UNIVERSITIES OF EUROPE COMBINED.
IT SAVED THE GREAT LAKES.
IT TOOK 99% OF THE LEAD OUT OF
THE AIR.
IT TOOK WANTON TERROR OUT OF OLD
AGE THROUGH SOCIAL SECURITY.
THERE'S A CASE TO BE MADE FOR
GOVERNMENT AND WHEN GOVERNMENT
-- CONFIDENCE IN GOVERNMENT AND
ITS INTEGRITY AND COMPETENCE IS
UNDERMINED, I THINK IT'S UP TO
THE PRESIDENT TO RISE TO ITS
DEFENSE AND TO SAY ANYBODY WHO
DOES THIS AND THREATENS THAT
CONFIDENCE -- AND I'LL ADD ONE
THING TO DAVID'S POINT AND THAT
IS WE'RE GOING TO SEE JIM AND
ROBIN COMING UPTON PIECE ON
WATERGATE.
THAT'S REALLY -- WATERGATE AND
VIETNAM IS WHEN CONFIDENCE IN
GOVERNMENT WHICH HAD BEEN 75%,
80%, THAT I TRUST GOVERNMENT TO
DO WHAT IS RIGHT MOST OR ALL OF
THE TIME, THAT'S WHEN IT REALLY
STARTED TO SLIDE.
AND SADLY IT'S NEVER COME BACK.
>> Woodruff: I WAS GOING TO
ASK THE TWO OF YOU ABOUT THAT.
SO JUST SO I UNDERSTAND, THE TWO
OF YOU ARE SAYING EVEN IF IT
TURNS OUT-- WHICH WAS WHAT
MR. MILLER WAS ARGUING AT THE
I.R.S. TODAY-- THAT THIS WAS
FOOLISH MISTAKES ON THE PART OF
CIVIL SERVANTS YOU'RE SAYING
THIS COULD DO THIS MUCH DAMAGE?
>> I THINK IT'S UP TO THE
PRESIDENT TO RESTORE THAT
CONFIDENCE.
>> Woodruff: AND YOU'RE SAYING
HE HASN'T DONE THAT?
>> I THINK HE'S STARTED TO ACT
BUT I DON'T THINK HE'S STEPPED
UP AND SAID "THIS IS ON MY
WATCH, I'M GOING TO GET ANSWERS
AND I TAKE RESPONSIBILITY."
>> Woodruff: DAVID, HOW MUCH
HAS THE PRESIDENT BEEN HARMD?
HOW MUCH HAS HIS AGENDA BEEN
HARMED BY THIS?
>> WHAT AGENDA WOULD THAT?
I DO THINK HE HAS A PROBLEM
WHERE THERE'S A VACUUM.
HE TRIED TO GET IN FRONT OF IT
TODAY BY TALKING ABOUT SPEEDING
SOME INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS BUT
THAT'S NOT MUCH OF AN AGENDA.
I THINK THE SCANDALS ARE
OCCUPYING SO MUCH SPACE BECAUSE
THE AGENDA, SUCH AS IT IS, IS
DOWN TO IMMIGRATION AND THAT'S
BEING HANDLED ON CAPITOL HILL SO
THERE'S NO MA MUCH OF AN AGENDA
IN PART BECAUSE OF THIS DISTRUST
OF GOVERNMENT.
AND IF I COULD SAY ONE THING
ABOUT THE OBLIVIOUSNESS OF THE
I.R.S., THIS IS NOT A SMALL
MATTER.
GOVERNMENTS GET DANGEROUS WHEN
THE PEOPLE IN GOVERNMENTS LOSE
THE HUMAN CONTEXT IN WHICH THEY
ARE ACTING.
WHEN THEY REDUCE EVERYTHING TO
ABSTRACT BUREAUCRATIC CATEGORY
WHICH IS I THINK WHAT ACTUALLY
HAPPENED IN THE I.R.S.
THAT'S WHEN GOVERNMENTS BEGIN TO
OVERSTEP AND ON MARK'S POINT
ABOUT THE GOOD AND THE BAD OF
GOVERNMENT, THE WAY I'D PUT IT
IS THAT GOVERNMENT IS LIKE FIRE.
IF YOU CAN MARSHALL IT, IT'S
TREMENDOUSLY USEFUL BUT IF IT'S
OUT OF CONTROL IT CAN BE
TREMENDOUSLY HARMFUL SO I WOULD
HOPE THE PRESIDENT WOULD REMIND
PEOPLE OF THE TWO-EDGED SWORD OF
GOVERNMENT.
THAT IT CAN DO US WONDERFUL GOOD
BUT IF UNRESTRAINED IT CAN DO US
INCREDIBLE TIERNEY.
>> Woodruff: AND YOU SAID,
MARK, WE'RE GOING TO GO FROM A
RETROSPECTIVE ON JIM LEHRER AND
ROBIN MacKNEEL, THEY COVERED
THE WATERGATE HEARINGS BACK IN
THE 1970s.
WHAT ARE THE LESSONS FOR YOU FOR
WATERGATE?
A CONNECTION TO WHAT'S GOING ON
THIS WEEK BUT IN A LARGER SENSE
THE -- YOU KNOW, THE SENSE THAT
THAT WAS THE SCANDAL OF ALL
SCANDALS.
>> YES, IF WE'RE GOING TO
COMPARE IT, I MEAN, WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT THE BOSTON
MASSACRE VERSUS DOUBLE PARKING.
I MEAN -- THIS WEEK.
THIS IS NOT A -- I'VE HEARD THIS
COMPARED THAT THE PRESIDENT, IN
FACT, SENATOR INHOFE TALKED
ABOUT IMPEACHMENT OF THE
PRESIDENT WHICH IS BEYOND
LUDICROUS BECAUSE THERE'S
NOTHING THAT RISES TO ANY EVEN N
HERE.
I WOULD SAY THIS, JUDY, THAT THE
TRUST AND CONFIDENCE IN THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT BEGAN TO END
AND ERODE AND DIMINISH WHEN THAT
HAPPENED.
WE HAD A PRESIDENT RESIGN, WE
HAD 25 OF HIS CLOSEST FRIENDS
AND ALLIES AND COLLEAGUES GO TO
JAIL AND IT WAS JUST -- IT WAS A
SHOCK FOR THIS COUNTRY'S SYSTEM
FROM WHICH IT'S NEVER REALLY
RECOVERED.
WE'RE STILL TO A GREAT DEGREE
RUNNING AGAINST WASHINGTON
BECAUSE OF VIETNAM AND WATERGATE
TO A GREAT DEGREE.
>> Woodruff: DAVID, WHAT ABOUT
WATERGATE?
>> I HAVE A PERVERSE
RELATIONSHIP TO WATERGATE
BECAUSE IT MADE ME INTERESTED IN
POLITICS.
IT WAS WATCHING THOSE HEARINGS
ON T.V. THAT LIT THE FIRE FOR ME
THAT THIS WAS REALLY IMPORTANT,
THAT WHAT HAPPENED IN WASHINGTON
WAS TREMENDOUSLY IMPORTANT FOR
GOOD AND EVIL, TESTS OF
CHARACTER AND VIRTUE AND IT
SHOULD BE POINTED OUT THAT IN
WATERGATE WE SAW ACTS OF
COWARDICE, WE SAW INCREDIBLE
ACTS OF COURAGE FROM SOME OF THE
PEOPLE CHASING IT DOWN AND
REACTING WITH INTEGRITY.
TO ME THE AFTERSHOCKS HAVE BEEN
NEGATIVE MOSTLY IN PART AS MARK
DESCRIBED WITH LOSS OF TRUST IN
GOVERNMENT.
IN PART THE RISE OF A SCANDAL
CULTURE.
WATERGATE REALLY WAS A SCANDAL
BUT WE NOW HAVE A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO TRY TO USE SCANDAL TO SETTLE
POLICY DIFFERENCES BY OTHER
MEANS.
WHO TAKE MINI SCANDALS AND TRY
TO USE THEM TO GOT SOME POLICY
EDGE OR A POLITICAL EDGE AND I
ACTUALLY THINK WE AS A COUNTRY
HAVE BECOME OVERADDICTED TO
SCANDAL AS A WAY TO DESTROY
OTHER PEOPLE.
AND THAT WAS IN THE SUPREME
COURT HEARINGS AND THAT'S IN A
LOT OF THE SCANDALS.
SO I THINK IT'S BRED A POLITICS
OF CYNICISM WHICH REVERBERATES
WITHOUT THE ACTUAL SUBSTANCE OF
AN ACTION OF CORRUPTION.
>> JUST ONE THING TO ADD, JUDY,
AND THAT IS THE THREE PATRIOTS
WHO WENT TO THE PRESIDENT --
PRESIDENT NIXON AND TOLD HIM HE
HAD TO LEAVE WERE REPUBLICANS,
BARRY GOLDWATER OF ARIZONA, JOHN
RHODES, THE REPUBLICAN HOUSE
LEADER AND HUGH SCOTT, THE
REPUBLICAN SENATE LEADER.
IT WAS A DIFFERENT TIME.
>> Woodruff: WELL, THIS IS THE
TIME WE ARE IN NOW AND WE THANK
YOU BOTH.
MARK SHIELDS, DAVID BROOKS.
>> Brown: AND THAT BRINGS US TO
OUR LOOK BACK AT WATERGATE
THROUGH OUR OWN VERY PERSONAL
LENS.
FIRST SOME CONTEXT, AS THE
SCANDAL WAS UNFOLDING IN 1973,
PUBLIC BROADCASTING WAS STILL IN
ITS INFANCY.
LYNDON JOHNSON HAD SIGNED THE
PUBLIC BROADCASTING ACT, WHICH
CREATED PBS AND NPR, IN 1967 AND
PBS WAS FOUNDED TWO YEARS LATER.
ITS MISSION, ESPECIALLY WHEN IT
CAME TO NATIONAL PUBLIC AFFAIRS
PROGRAMMING, WAS VERY MUCH STILL
AN OPEN QUESTION WHEN BEFORE THE
ERA OF C-SPAN, BEFORE CAMERAS
WERE REGULARLY TRAINED ON THE
CONGRESS, A DECISION WAS MADE TO
PRESENT GAVEL-TO-GAVEL COVERAGE
THAT WOULD THEN BE REPEATED THAT
SAME EVENING.
THAT WAS THE BACKDROP, AS THE
WATERGATE HEARINGS BEGAN 40
YEARS AGO TODAY.
>> GOOD EVENING FROM WASHINGTON.
IN A FEW MOMENTS WE'RE GOING TO
BRING YOU THE ENTIRE PROCEEDINGS
IN THE FIRST DAY OF THE SENATE
WATERGATE HEARINGS.
HEARINGS TO BEAR THE TRUTH ABOUT
THE WIDE RANGE OF ILLEGAL,
ESTABLISHED OR STILL MERELY
ALLEGED, SURROUNDING THE
REELECTION OF PRESIDENT NIXON
LAST YEAR.
>> Brown: MAY 17, 1973: DAY ONE
OF THE HISTORIC SENATE HEARINGS
THAT WOULD, A YEAR LATER, LEAD
TO THE RESIGNATION OF AN
AMERICAN PRESIDENT.
IT WAS ALSO THE START OF
SOMETHING QUITE NEW FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING LED BY ROBERT
MacNEIL AND JIM LEHRER.
>> WE ARE RUNNING IT ALL EACH
DAY BECAUSE WE THINK THESE
HEARINGS ARE IMPORTANT AND
BECAUSE WE THINK IT IS IMPORTANT
THAT YOU GET A CHANCE TO SEE THE
WHOLE THING AND MAKE YOUR OWN
JUDGMENTS.
SOME NIGHTS WE MAY BE IN
COMPETITION WITH A LATE, LATE
MOVIE.
WE ARE DOING THIS AS AN
EXPERIMENT, TEMPORARILY
ABANDONING OUR ABILITY TO EDIT,
TO GIVE YOU THE WHOLE ORSTSTY,
HOWEVER MANY HOURS IT MAY TAKE.
>> Brown: THE BOTCHED BREAK-IN
AT DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE
HEADQUARTERS IN THE WATERGATE
COMPLEX IN WASHINGTON D.C. HAD
HAPPENED ONE YEAR EARLIER.
THE SPECIAL SENATE COMMITTEE WAS
SET TO BUILD ON REPORTING BY BOB
WOODWARD AND CARL BERNSTEIN OF
THE "WASHINGTON POST" AND
REPORTERS AT OTHER NEWS
ORGANIZATIONS.
ONE KEY QUESTION WAS FAMOUSLY
PUT BY COMMITTEE VICE-CHAIRMAN,
REPUBLICAN HOWARD BAKER.
>> WHAT DID THE PRESIDENT KNOW,
AND WHEN DID HE KNOW IT?
>> Brown: 40 YEARS AFTER
DEMOCRATIC COMMITTEE CHAIR SAM
ERVIN, THLFCOUNTRY LAWYER" FROMH
CAROLINA, FIRST GAVELED THE
HEARINGS INTO SESSION, MacNEIL
AND LEHRER-- ROBIN AND JIM TO
US-- RETURNED TO THE SAME STUDIO
FROM WHICH THEY'D BROADCAST IN
THE SUMMER OF 1973 FOR MORE THAN
250 HOURS.
DID YOU HAVE ANY IDEA WHAT YOU
WERE GETTING INTO AT THAT
MOMENT, EITHER FOR THE NATION OR
FOR YOUR OWN FUTURES?
>> I THINK WE DID.
REMEMBER, WE BROADCAST LIVE
DURING THE DAYTIME AS IT
HAPPENED.
AND THEN WE COMPLETELY REPEATED
IT, GAVEL TO GAVEL.
SO IT WAS A DOUBLE-HIT THERE.
AND THAT WAS A HUGE COMMITMENT
FOR PUBLIC BROADCASTING TO MAKE.
AND THE REASON THEY MADE IT WAS
BECAUSE OF THIS PREMISE THAT THE
PRESIDENCY OF THE UNITED STATES
WAS AT STAKE.
NOW, NOT NECESSARILY THAT IT WAS
GOING TO END IN THE RESULT OF
THE IMPEACHMENT OF RICHARD
NIXON.
BUT IT WAS GOING TO BE A ROUGH
TIME AHEAD FOR THE WHOLE
COUNTRY.
>> Brown: THEY WERE, IN SOME
WAYS, AN UNLIKELY DUO.
CAREER WITH
REUTERS BEFORE JOINING NBC AND,
LATER, THE BBC.
LEHRER, BORN IN WICHITA, KANSAS,
HAD WORKED FOR NEWSPAPERS IN
DALLAS, BEFORE HOSTING A LOCAL
PUBLIC AFFAIRS PROGRAM.
THEY WERE BROUGHT TOGETHER IN
WASHINGTON TO WORK FOR THE
NATIONAL PUBLIC AFFAIRS CENTER
FOR TELEVISION, OR NPACT.
>> IT TURNED OUT, WE WERE LIVING
QUITE CLOSE TO EACH OTHER IN
BETHESDA.
WE EACH HAD LITTLE DAUGHTERS IN
THE SAME KINDERGARTEN THERE.
WE BECAME VERY GOOD FRIENDS.
>> WE SURE DID, WE HAD NO
CHOICE.
WE HAD TO BE FRIENDS.
WE SPENT ALL DAY AND ALL NIGHT
TOGETHER.
>> WE BECAME VERY GOOD FRIENDS.
AND COLLEAGUES.
AND AS THE PUBLIC PERCEIVED IT,
A TEAM.
>> Brown: ROBIN BEGAN EACH DAY'S
BROADCAST WITH A READING OF THE
COMMITTEE'S 64 WORD OPENING
RESOLUTION.
>> I THOUGHT THAT WAS A TERRIFIC
THING.
THE FIRST FEW, MAYBE THE FIRST
30 NIGHTS, I EVEN TEARED UP WHEN
I HEARD YOU.
IT WAS JUST-- IT SET THE TONE.
>> IT TOOK IT OUT OF OUR HANDS
TO CHARACTERIZE WHAT THE
HEARINGS WERE ABOUT.
THAT WOULD ALL FOLLOW.
BUT IT GAVE THE WAY THE CONGRESS
CHARACTERIZED IT.
WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO BE ABLE TO
WATCH THIS EVENING IS A RARE
GLIMPSE GIVEN BY REAL
ADVENTURERS INTO THE WORLD OF
MYSTERY AND INTRIGUE WE NORMALLY
HEAR ABOUT ONLY IN SPY NOVELS.
>> Brown: THE HEARINGS HAD
GRIPPING MOMENTS RIGHT FROM THE
START.
ON DAY TWO, WATERGATE BURGLAR
JAMES McCORD, THE FORMER
SECURITY DIRECTOR FOR THE
COMMITTEE TO RE-ELECT PRESIDENT
NIXON, DEMONSTRATED HOW TO BUG A
TELEPHONE.
>> DO YOU SWEAR THAT THE
EVIDENCE THAT Y SHOUALL GIVE --
>> BUT THE FIRST REAL GAME-
CHANGER CAME IN LATE JUNE FROM
JOHN DEAN, FORMER COUNSEL TO
PRESIDENT NIXON.
READING ALOUD A 245 PAGE
STATEMENT, DEAN DROPPED A
BOMBSHELL, ALLEGING THAT THE
PRESIDENT HAD DIRECT KNOWLEDGE
ABOUT THE COVER-UP.
>> I BEGAN BY TELLING THE
PRESIDENT THAT THERE WAS A
CANCER GROWING ON THE PRESIDENCY
AND IF THE CANCER WAS NOT
REMOVED, THE PRESIDENT HIMSELF
WOULD BE KILLED BY IT.
I ALSO TOLD HIM THAT IT WAS
IMPORTANT THAT THIS CANCER BE
REMOVED IMMEDIATELY BECAUSE IT
WAS GROWING MORE DEADLY EVERY
DAY.
>> ALL RIGHT, THE QUESTION OF
COURSE IS WHAT MORE IS THERE TO
SAY.
REGARDLESS OF THE TIME ZONE
WHERE YOU LIVE, IT'S VERY LATE.
AND THE TESTIMONY OF JOHN W.
DEAN III HAS BEEN VERY HOT,
DESPITE THE SEVERAL GALLONS OF
WATER HE CONSUMED WHILE READING
THAT LENGTHY AND VERY HISTORICAL
DOCUMENT OF HIS.
>> Brown: YOU'RE WATCHING THINGS
UNFOLD.
A LOT OF IT IS DRONING ON, LET'S
FACE IT, RIGHT?
AND THEN SOMETHING LIKE THAT
HAPPENS.
>> AND HE TALKED FOR A VERY LONG
TIME.
YOU COULD HEAR A PIN DROP IN
THAT ROOM THE WHOLE TIME HE WAS
TALKING.
AND MY GUESS IS, THAT THROUGHOUT
AMERICA IT WAS THE SAME.
HE WAS THE SHOWSTOPPER.
THERE WAS NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
>> SOME OF THESE THINGS CAME OUT
QUITE UNEXPECTEDLY.
IN A VERY CASUAL, ALMOST OFF-
HAND MANNER.
>> EVERYTHING IS UNDERLINED
NOWADAYS.
EVERYTHING HAS ARROWS POINTING
AT IT.
THIS IS GOING TO BE A GREAT DAY
TODAY AND WERE LIKELY TO-- WE
DIDN'T HAVE ANY OF THAT KIND OF
BUILDUP.
THE HEARINGS SPOKE FOR
THEMSELVES.
>> Brown: WHEN THE COMMITTEE
TOOK BREAKS, GUESTS WOULD JOIN
ROBIN AND JIM IN THE STUDIO FOR
ANALYSIS.
>> MR. NIXON HAS TO DO SOMETHING
I WOULD THINK NOW IN RESPONSE TO
VERY SERIOUS CHARGES THAT MR.
DEAN MADE.
>> Brown: AND AT DAYS END, THE
TEAM PUT THEIR OWN QUESTIONS TO
COMMITTEE MEMBERS OUTSIDE THE
HEARING ROOM.
>> YOU MAY HAVE NOTICED THAT
>> I'M NOT TIRED, AS A MATTER OF
FACT THE ONLY THING THAT I
OBJECT TO NOW IS THAT IT CUTS
INTO MY EXERCISE SCHEDULE.
>> Brown: TESTIMONY CONTINUED,
BUT BY MID-JULY, THERE WAS STILL
NO PROOF THAT JOHN DEAN HAD BEEN
TELLING THE TRUTH.
THAT IS, UNTIL FRED THOMPSON,
THE CHIEF REPUBLICAN COUNSEL AND
A FRIEND OF SENATOR BAKER'S FROM
TENNESSEE, PUT QUESTIONS TO A
LITTLE-KNOWN FORMER WHITE HOUSE
AIDE NAMED ALEXANDER
BUTTERFIELD.
>> MR. BUTTERFIELD, ARE YOU
AWARE OF ANY LISTENING DEVICES
IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT?
>> I WAS AWARE OF LISTENING
DICESEV, YES SIR.
>> WERE YOU AWARE OF ANY DEVICES
INSTALLED IN THE EXECUTIVE
OFFICE BUILDING OFFICE OF THE
PRESIDENT?
>> YES SIR.
>> WERE THEY INSTALLED AT THE
SAME TIME?
>> YES SIR, THEY WERE INSTALLED
THE SAME TIME.
>> WELL THAT WAS A BOMBSHELL.
ALSO, IT BECAME THE BOMB THAT
EVENTUALLY DID DESTROY THE
PRESIDENCY.
>> BUTTERFIELD REVEALED THAT ALL
OF PRESIDENT NIXON'S
CONVERSATIONS IN HIS TWO WHITE
HOUSE OFFICES HAD BEEN TAPE-
RECORDED FOR THE PAST TWO YEARS.
AND SO HAVE HIS OFFICE PHONE
CONVERSATIONS.
THE STUNNED ERVIN COMMITTEE,
WHICH DISCOVERED THIS FACT ONLY
LAST FRIDAY, IMMEDIATELY BEGAN
PLANNING TO DEMAND THE TAPES OF
THE CRUCIAL WATERGATE-RELATED
CONVERSATIONS.
THOSE TAPES COULD SETTLE ONCE
AND FOR ALL HOW MUCH THE
PRESIDENT KNEW AND WHEN.
>> Brown: AFTER THE BUTTERFIELD
REVELATION, THE COMMITTEE ISSUED
A SUBPOENA FOR THE TAPES.
BUT PRESIDENT NIXON REFUSED TO
RELEASE THEM.
>> IF YOU NOTICE THE PRESIDENT
SAYS HE'S HEARD THE TAPES, OR
SOME OF THEM, AND THEY SUSTAIN
HIS POSITION.
BUT HE SAYS HE'S NOT GOING TO
LET ANYBODY ELSE HAVE THEM, FOR
FEAR THEY MIGHT DRAW A DIFFERENT
>> Brown: BY MID-SUMMER, THE
COMMERCIAL TV NETWORKS, WHICH
HAD ALL CARRIED THE HEARINGS AT
THE START, HAD IN LARGE PART
GONE BACK TO THEIR REGULARLY
SCHEDULED PROGRAMMING.
FOR ITS PART, PUBLIC TELEVISION
WRESTLED WITH A DIFFERENT
CONCERN: THE VERY IDEA OF THIS
KIND OF COVERAGE HAD BEEN
CONTROVERSIAL FROM THE START.
>> A LOT OF STATION MANAGERS IN
PARTICULAR AT THAT TIME OF THE
PUBLIC TELEVISION COMMUNITY,
THAT HAD GROWN OUT OF
EDUCATIONAL TELEVISION, DIDN'T
THINK THAT PBS SHOULD BE IN THE
NEWS BUSINESS AT ALL.
THEY THOUGHT WE SHOULD BE IN
CULTURE AND EDUCATION.
AND THE NETWORKS DO NEWS AND
CURRENT PUBLIC AFFAIRS.
>> Brown: AND NOT ONLY THAT, BUT
OF COURSE THE POLITICAL CONTEXT
OF THE ADMINISTRATION, THE NIXON
ADMINISTRATION ALSO THINKING
THAT PUBLIC BROADCASTING
SHOULDN'T BE IN PUBLIC AFFAIRS.
>> NOT PERHAPS, VERY DEFINITELY
THEY THOUGHT SO.
>> THE NIXON WHITE HOUSE
IMMEDIATELY CHARGED THAT WAS NOT
THE SORT OF LOCALISM THAT PUBLIC
BROADCASTING WAS ESTABLISHED TO
CREATE.
AND THEY WERE VERY OPEN IN THEIR
ATTACKS.
>> Brown: INDEED, THE
PRESIDENT'S TEAM HAD BEEN
CAMPAIGNING FOR SOME TIME TO
UNDERMINE PUBLIC TELEVISION'S
CREDIBILITY.
AN INTERNAL WHITE HOUSE MEMO
FROM NOVEMBER 1971 SHOWED THAT
OFFICIALS PLANNED TO QUIETLY
ENCOURAGE STATION MANAGERS
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY TO PUT
PRESSURE ON NPACT AND THE
CORPORATION FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING TO STAY OUT OF THE
NEWS BUSINESS.
SO YOU WERE VERY AWARE OF THIS.
>> WE WERE VERY AWARE AND WE
WERE TRYING, AND I THINK
SUCCEEDING IN BEING VERY EVEN-
HANDED ABOUT THE NIXON
PRESIDENCY.
AND I'D COVERED THE PRESIDENT,
I'D COVERED NIXON FOR NBC AND
BBC FOR SEVERAL YEARS BEFORE ALL
THIS CAME ABOUT.
AND I HAD DONE MY BEST TO BE AS
EVENHANDED AND FAIR-MINDED AS I
THINK WE HAVE GONE ON TO MAKE IT
AN ESSENTIAL ATTRIBUTE OF OUR
PROGRAM SINCE.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHERE IT ALL
STARTED.
IS WITH WATERGATE.
>> I THINK WE KNEW IMMEDIATELY
THAT PUBLIC-- WE AND PUBLIC
TELEVISION WAS DOING SOMETHING
THAT COMMERCIAL NETWORKS FOR ALL
THEIR BRILLIANCE IN NEWS
WOULDN'T AND COULDN'T DO.
COULDN'T DESTROY THEIR EVENING
PROGRAMMING FOR THE WATERGATE
HEARINGS.
>> THAT WAS BEFORE THERE WERE
THINGS LIKE C-SPAN.
GOING GAVEL-TO-GAVEL, THE WAY WE
WERE GOING, IN THE DAYTIME AND
IN PARTICULAR REPEATING IT AT
N
THIS HAD NEVER HAPPENED BEFORE.
>> Brown: WAS THERE A POINT
SOMEWHERE ALONG THE WAY WHERE
YOU REALIZED HEY THIS CAN WORK?
I MEAN THIS BEING YOUR
PARTNERSHIP AND WHAT'S HAPPENING
ON THE PICTURE.
>> I THINK WE REALIZED THAT
RIGHT AWAY.
>> WE FELT THAT RIGHT AWAY.
WE FELT TWO THINGS.
WE FELT THAT-- AND WE TALKED
ABOUT IT-- THAT THERE WAS ROLE
FOR PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
A SERIOUS, NEEDED ROLE WITHIN
PUBLIC BROADCASTING TO DO NEWS
AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS TYPE
PROGRAMMING.
AND THAT WE FELT THAT WE WORKED.
IN OTHER WORDS, THAT YOU AND I
CAUSE-- EVEN THOUGH HE'S A VERY
SOPHISTICATED AND I'M VERY
UNSOPHISTICATED, WE WERE-- I WAS
THE COUNTRY BOY AND HE WAS THE
URBAN BOY.
BUT WE WERE ABSOLUTELY IN SYNC
ABOUT JOURNALISM.
>> Brown: THE VIEWERS AGREED.
MAIL STARTED POURING IN BY THE
BAGFUL, SOME 70,000 LETTERS
EXPRESSING SUPPORT FOR PUBLIC
TELEVISION'S COVERAGE.
>> SUDDENLY, THIS NEW PUBLIC
TELEVISION, WHICH VERY FEW
PEOPLE KNEW ANYTHING ABOUT...
>> Brown: RIGHT.
>> SUDDENLY THE WHOLE NATION
SEEMED TO KNOW ABOUT IT.
AND, FOR MANY, MANY STATIONS WHO
CARRIED IT BOTH IN THE DAYTIME
AND AGAIN IN THE EVENING, THEIR
AUDIENCES DOUBLED, TRIPLED,
QUADRUPLED.
AND PEOPLE SPONTANEOUSLY BEGAN
TO SEND MONEY TO THE PUBLIC
TELEVISION, TAKING UP
MEMBERSHIPS IN THE STATIONS.
>> Brown: DID YOU FEEL THAT THE
FUTURE IN SOME SENSE OF PUBLIC
TELEVISION WAS RIDING ON THIS?
WAS IT THAT STRONG?
>> WE WERE SO BUSY DOING IT
THAT...
>> AND WE WERE SO ENTHRALLED BY
THE HEARINGS.
AS WERE EVERYBODY I'VE SPOKEN
TO.
>> IT WAS A PEANUT, JUST LIKE
EATING PEANUTS.
>> Brown: MEANWHILE, ON JULY 31,
THE SENATE HEARINGS TOOK ANOTHER
SHARP TURN.
>> GOOD EVENING.
H.R. HALDEMAN, OFTEN DESCRIBED
AS ONCE THE MOST POWERFUL MAN
NEXT TO PRESIDENT NIXON, TODAY
POLITELY AND MODESTLY DENIED A
LONG CATALOG OF CHARGES BY
OTHERS WITNESSES IMPLICATING HIM
IN WATERGATE.
>> PRESIDENT NIXON HAD NO
KNOWLEDGE OF, OR INVOLVEMENT IN
EITHER THE WATERGATE AFFAIR
ITSELF OR THE SUBSEQUENT EFFORTS
OF A COVER-UP OF THE WATERGATE.
IT WILL BE EQUALLY CLEAR DESPITE
ALL THE UNFOUNDED ALLEGATIONS TO
THE CONTRARY, THAT I HAD NO SUCH
KNOWLEDGE OR INVOLVEMENT.
>> Brown: UNLESS THE TAPES ARE
MADE PUBLIC OR SOME OTHER
REVELATION SHOULD COME, THE
SENATORS AS WELL AS THE REST OF
US WHO ARE FOLLOWING ARE GOING
TO HAVE TO EVENTUALLY MAKE A
CHOICE OF BELIEVING JOHN DEAN OR
BOB HALDEMAN.
THAT'S THE WAY IT LOOKS TO ME AT
LEAST, AT 3:00 OR SO IN THE
MORNING.
FEEL FREE TO DISAGREE.
>> 3:00 OR SO IN THE MORNING.
>> WE'RE WORKING DAY AND NIGHT
AND THAT EXPLAINS WHY I HAVE NOT
GOTTEN A HAIRCUT.
>> Brown: THAT'S WHAT YOU MOST
NOTICE NOW, 40 YEARS LATER.
>> HOW COULD I HAVE LET MY HAIR
GO THAT WAY, AS THEY SAY.
WHAT'S SO INTERESTING HERE, JUST
AS A MATTER OF HISTORY, WE LAID
IT OUT.
I MEAN UNLESS THOSE TAPES BECOME
PUBLIC, THAT ARGUMENT COULD
CONTINUE TO FLOW.
BUT THE TAPES DID BECOME PUBLIC
AND THEN SUDDENLY BOOM, IT WAS
ALL OVER WITH.
>> Brown: BY THE END OF THE
SUMMER, THE HEARINGS BEGAN TO
WIND DOWN, AS THE FIGHT OVER THE
TAPES SHIFTED TO THE COURTS.
THE FOLLOWING JULY, THE U.S.
SUPREME COURT ORDERED PRESIDENT
NIXON TO TURN OVER 64 WATERGATE-
RELATED TAPES AND DOCUMENTS AND
THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
BEGAN ITS FORMAL PUBLIC DEBATE
ON ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT
AGAINST THE PRESIDENT.
ONCE IT BECAME CLEAR HE WOULD
NOT SURVIVE AN IMPEACHMENT VOTE
ON THE HOUSE FLOOR, PRESIDENT
NIXON ANNOUNCED HIS RESIGNATION.
>> I SHALL RESIGN THE PRESIDENCY
EFFECTIVE AT NOON TOMORROW.
>> Brown: MANY YEARS LATER, WHAT
DO YOU THINK THE IMPACT THAT
WATERGATE WAS ON THIS NATION.
HOW DO YOU-- CAN YOU SUM IT UP?
>> THE WAY I WOULD SUM IT UP IS
THAT ITS GOOD NEWS, BAD NEWS
SITUATION.
IT SHOWED THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNITED STATES AT ITS ABSOLUTE
WORST AND THEN IT SHOWED IT AT
ITS ABSOLUTE BEST.
IT CORRECTED A WRONGDOING, A
SERIES OF WRONGDOINGS THAT WAS
UNPRECEDENTED.
BUT THE WAY IT CORRECTED WAS
ALSO A SERIES OF UNPRECEDENTED
DOINGS.
>> Brown: WHAT ABOUT THE IMPACT
IT HAD ON YOU PERSONALLY, AND
PROFESSIONALLY?
>> WELL IT MADE US A TEAM.
PEOPLE PERCEIVED US AS A TEAM
AND SUGGESTED WE DO A NIGHTLY
PROGRAM.
>> WHAT HAPPENED 40 YEARS AGO,
MADE POSSIBLE WHAT WE'VE DONE
FOR THE LAST 40 YEARS,
PROFESSIONAL JOURNALISTS.
NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
>> Brown: WHAT HAVE THEY DONE?
WELL, THE "ROBERT MacNEIL
REPORT"-- SOON TO BECOME THE
"MACNEIL/LEHRER REPORT"-- WAS
LAUNCHED IN 1975.
A PARTNERSHIP, A FORMAT, AN
APPROACH THAT HAS SEEN SOME
CHANGES OVER TIME, YES, BUT LED
DIRECTLY TO THE PROGRAM YOU'RE
WATCHING TODAY.
40 YEARS AFTER ROBIN AND JIM
FIRST TEAMED UP TO COVER THE
WATERGATE HEARINGS.
ONLINE YOU CAN FIND MUCH MORE OF
OUR WATERGATE ANNIVERSARY
COVERAGE, INCLUDING STORIES
YOU'VE SHARED WITH US ABOUT HOW
THE SENATE HEARINGS AFFECTED
YOU, A LOOK AT WHERE SOME OF THE
KEY PLAYERS ARE TODAY AND
HISTORIC FOOTAGE RECAPPING THE
SHOWSTOPPING MOMENTS FROM THE
SUMMER OF 1973.
THAT'S ALL ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
>> Brown AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE OUTGOING ACTING HEAD OF THE
I.R.S. FACED SHARP QUESTIONS
FROM LAWMAKERS OVER HIS AGENCY'S
IMPROPER TARGETING OF
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS.
AT LEAST 76 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
IN IRAQ IN THE DEADLIEST DAY
THERE IN MORE THAN EIGHT MONTHS.
AND DEFENSE SECRETARY HAGEL
FORMALLY ORDERED THE MILITARY TO
RE-CERTIFY THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
INVOLVED IN PROGRAMS ON SEXUAL
ASSAULTS IN THE RANKS.
ONLINE, THE TIMELESS ALLURE OF
THE GREAT GATSBY.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: ONCE AGAIN, F.
SCOTT FITGERALD'S CLASSIC NOVEL
CAPTIVATES MODERN AUDIENCES ON
THE BIG SCREEN.
WHAT'S BEHIND THE PHENOMENON?
LISTEN TO OUR CONVERSATION ON
ART BEAT.
TONIGHT ON "NEED TO KNOW," WHILE
THE NUMBER OF ILLEGAL BORDER
CROSSINGS HAS PLUMMETED, JUST AS
MANY PEOPLE ARE STILL DYING
WHILE TRYING TO ENTER IN THE
U.S. FROM MEXICO.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON MONDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT WHAT
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
"WASHINGTON WEEK" CAN BE SEEN
LATER THIS EVENING ON MOST
PBS STATIONS.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE MONDAY EVENING.
HAVE A NICE WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.